>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY MARCH, 7: 50 YEARS
AFTER THE MARCHES IN SELMA, HOW
THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT HAS SHAPED
BOTH MODERN POLITICAL PARTIES;
SUICIDE BOMBINGS ROCK NIGERIA;
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT, IT
WAS THE FIRST STATE TO LEGALIZE
ASSISTED SUICIDE NEARLY 20 YEARS
AGO.
>> I THOUGHT I HAD MORE TIME
WITH HIM, BUT HE SAID TO ME,
"PAM, I WANT TO TAKE IT ON
FRIDAY OF THAT WEEK."
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
PRESIDENT OBAMA WAS IN ALABAMA
TODAY ALONG WITH ABOUT 100
MEMBERS OF CONGRESS AND OTHER
DIGNITARIES TO COMMEMORATE THE
50th ANNIVERSARY OF THE MARCH ON
SELMA.
HE SPOKE AT THE EDMUND PETTUS
BRIDGE, THE SITE WHERE POLICE
AND STATE TROOPERS BEAT AND
TEAR-GASSED PEACEFUL PROTESTERS
DEMANDING VOTING RIGHTS.
THAT INCIDENT SHOCKED THE NATION
AND SPARKED THE PASSAGE OF THE
1965 VOTING RIGHTS ACT.
THE PRESIDENT TOUCHED ON VOTER
APATHY, PROTESTS IN FERGUSON,
AND THE HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE OF
THE MARCH ON SELMA.
>> THE AMERICANS WHO CROSSED
THIS BRIDGE, THEY WERE NOT
PHYSICALLY IMPOSING, BUT THEY
GAVE COURAGE TO MILLIONS.
THEY HELD NO ELECTED OFFICE, BUT
THEY LED A NATION.
BECAUSE OF WHAT THEY DID, THE
DOORS OF OPPORTUNITY SWUNG OPEN
NOT JUST FOR BLACK FOLKS, BUT
FOR EVERY AMERICAN.
WOMEN MARCHED THROUGH THOSE
DOORS.
LATINOS MARCHED THROUGH THOSE
ASIAN-AMERICANS, GAY AMERICANS,
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES,
THEY ALL CAME THROUGH THOSE
DOORS.
WHAT HAPPENED IN FERGUSON MAY
NOT BE UNIQUE, BUT IT'S NO
LONGER ENDEMIC OR SANCTIONED BY
LAW AND CUSTOM; AND BEFORE THE
CIVIL RIGHTS MOVEMENT, IT MOST
SURELY WAS.
WHAT'S OUR EXCUSE TODAY FOR NOT
VOTING?
HOW DO WE SO CASUALLY DISCARD
THE RIGHT FOR WHICH SO MANY
FOUGHT?
HOW DO WE SO FULLY GIVE AWAY OUR
POWER, OUR VOICE, IN SHAPING
AMERICA'S FUTURE?
>> Sreenivasan: GEORGIA
REPRESENTATIVE JOHN LEWIS
INTRODUCED THE PRESIDENT.
IN 1965, HE LED THE MARCH AND
WAS BADLY INJURED IN THE CLASH.
>> BECAUSE IN THE FINAL
ANALYSIS, WE ARE ONE PEOPLE, ONE
FAMILY, THE HUMAN FAMILY.
WE ALL LIVE IN THE SAME HOUSE,
AN AMERICAN HOUSE.
>> Sreenivasan: SO, HOW MUCH DID
THE VOTING RIGHTS ACT CHANGE THE
POLITICAL LANDSCAPE OVER THE
PAST 50 YEARS?
JOINING US NOW FOR SOME INSIGHT
JOHN HARWOOD, CHIEF WASHINGTON
CORRESPONDENT FOR CNBC AND
POLITICAL WRITER FOR THE "NEW
YORK TIMES."
SO, WE'VE THOUGHT ABOUT THAT BIG
PICTURE, THE MARCH THAT IS
SEARED IN PEOPLE'S MINDS.
WHAT KIND OF CHANGES HAPPENED
SINCE THEN, ESPECIALLY FOR
VOTING RIGHTS?
>> WELL, FIRST OF ALL, YOU'VE
SEEN A COMPLETE COLLAPSE OF
REPUBLICAN SUPPORT AMONG AFRICAN
AMERICANS.
THAT HAPPENED VERY QUICKLY.
RICHARD NIXON GOT ABOUT A THIRD
OF THE BLACK VOTE IN 1960.
BARRY GOLDWATER GOT 6%.
REPUBLICANS HAVE NEVER
APPROACHED THAT NIXON LEVEL
SINCE.
SECOND, YOU'VE HAD BLACKS AND
NON-WHITES IN GENERAL, INCLUDING
HISPANICS AND LATINOS, EXPAND AS
A PROPORTION OF THE ELECTORATE.
AND OVER TIME, THAT HAS WORKED
TO THE ADVANTAGE OF THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY.
1964, WHEN LYNDON JOHNSON WAS
RE-ELECTED, WHITES PROVIDED
ABOUT 95% OF ALL THE VOTES CAST
IN THE ELECTION.
IN 2012, WHITES WERE ABOUT 72%,
AND THAT GROWTH, GIVEN THE
SHIFT OF WHITES TO VERY
DOMINANT SUPPORT FOR THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY, NON-WHITES FOR
THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY, HAS
PRODUCED A RACIALLY POLARIZED
ELECTORATE, BUT ONE THAT, GIVEN
THE GROWTH OF NON-WHITES, HAS
WORKED TO THE DEMOCRATS'
ADVANTAGE IN PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTIONS LATELY.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE ARE
DEMOCRATS AND SOME REPUBLICANS
THAT WILL BE THERE TODAY OR
THROUGH THE WEEKEND IN SELMA,
BUT WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THEY GO
BACK TO WASHINGTON?
>> WHEN THEY GO BACK TO
WASHINGTON, THEY'RE GOING TO
TAKE THE PLACES THAT THEY'VE
BECOME ACCUSTOMED TO IN THIS
POLARIZED ENVIRONMENT THAT
WE'RE... HAVE BEEN LIVING WITH
FOR SOME TIME.
PRESIDENT GEORGE W. BUSH IS
GOING TO REPRESENT REPUBLICANS,
BUT YOU DON'T HAVE REPUBLICAN
LEADERS IN CONGRESS GOING DOWN.
ALTHOUGH, INTERESTINGLY, SENATE
MAJORITY LEADER MITCH McCONNELL
HIMSELF WAS A SUPPORTER OF CIVIL
RIGHTS AT THE TIME OF SELMA, AS
WAS SOME OF THE REPUBLICAN
POLITICIANS THAT HE WORKED FOR
IN KENTUCKY AT THAT TIME.
BUT WE'VE SEEN A PRETTY DRAMATIC
SHIFT IN THE PARTY'S STANCE ON
CIVIL RIGHTS-RELATED ISSUES.
REPUBLICANS HAVE BECOME ALMOST
ENTIRELY A CONSERVATIVE PARTY,
DEMOCRATS LEFT OF CENTER, AND
THAT IS THE... THOSE ARE THE
CONTOURS THAT THEY'RE GOING TO
RESUME WHEN THEY GET BACK TO
WASHINGTON.
>> Sreenivasan: HOW HAVE SOME OF
THE RECENT EVENTS-- THE 2013
SUPREME COURT DECISION, AND THE
VOTING RIGHTS AMENDMENT ACT THAT
ARE TRYING TO WORK THEIR WAY
THROUGH CONGRESS-- HOW ARE THEY
IMPACTING THIS CONVERSATION?
>> WELL, YOU'VE SEEN SOUTHERN
STATES TRY TO GET OUT FROM UNDER
THE AEGIS OF THE VOTING RIGHTS
ACT, AND THEY'VE HAD SOME
SUCCESS IN THE COURTS AT DOING
THAT, REDUCING THE BURDEN OF
PROOF ON SOUTHERN STATES TO
JUSTIFY THEIR ELECTORAL
ARRANGEMENTS AND PROCESSES.
WHILE THAT'S GONE ON, YOU'VE HAD
A REVERSAL IN THE MAKEUP OF
LEGISLATURES AND ALSO
CONGRESSIONAL DELEGATIONS FROM
SOUTHERN STATES WHERE PRETTY
MUCH ALL THE DEMOCRATS NOW ARE
BLACK FROM SOUTHERN STATES, AND
THERE ARE NO WHITE SOUTHERN
DEMOCRATS LEFT IN THE CONGRESS.
VERY FEW, IF ANY.
AND THAT HAS CHANGED THE
POLITICAL CONVERSATION.
IT'S MADE THE SOUTH THE
EPICENTER OF THE MODERN
REPUBLICAN PARTY.
AND ONE OF THE CHALLENGES FOR
REPUBLICANS GOING FORWARD IS
TRYING TO BREAK OUT OF THAT
BASE, EXPAND THEIR SUPPORT IN
THE NORTHEAST AND THE MIDWEST,
IF NOT THE PACIFIC COAST, WHICH
IS VERY STRONGLY IN THE
DEMOCRATS' FAVOR AT THE MOMENT.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT, JOHN
HARWOOD, JOINING US FROM
WASHINGTON, D.C., THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> YOU BET.
>> Sreenivasan: AN UNARMED TEEN
WAS SHOT BY POLICE IN MADISON,
WISCONSIN, LAST NIGHT, PROMPTING
PROTESTS.
19-YEAR-OLD TONY ROBINSON WAS
SPOTTED JUMPING INTO TRAFFIC.
THE POLICE CHIEF SAYS THE
RESPONDING OFFICER FOLLOWED
THE SUSPECT TO AN APARTMENT,
HEARD A DISTURBANCE AND THEN
FORCED HIS WAY INSIDE.
THE TEEN REPORTEDLY ASSAULTED
THE OFFICER, WHICH LED TO THE
SHOOTING.
ROBINSON HAD BEEN A SUSPECT IN A
RECENT BATTERY CASE.
MADISON MAYOR PAUL SOGLIN CALLED
THE INCIDENT "A TRAGEDY BEYOND
DESCRIPTION."
STATE INVESTIGATORS ARE LOOKING
INTO THE CASE.
ANOTHER VEHICLE RECALL WAS JUST
ANNOUNCED, THIS TIME FROM FIAT-
CHRYSLER.
THE COMPANY IS RECALLING MORE
THAN 702,000 S.U.V.s AND
MINIVANS TO FIX DEFECTIVE
IGNITION SWITCHES.
CERTAIN ROAD CONDITIONS COULD
UNEXPECTEDLY TURN OFF THE
ENGINE, DISABLING THE AIRBAGS,
POWER STEERING AND POWER BRAKES.
THE RECALL COVERS CERTAIN MODELS
OF THE DODGE GRAND CARAVAN, THE
CHRYSLER TOWN AND COUNTRY
MINIVAN, AND THE DODGE JOURNEY
S.U.V.
YOU CAN FIND THE SPECIFICS ON
OUR WEB SITE, pbs.org/newshour.
IN ARIZONA, FRIENDS AND FAMILY
HELD A FINAL MEMORIAL SERVICE
FOR THE 26-YEAR-OLD AMERICAN
WOMAN KILLED AFTER BEING
CAPTURED BY ISIS MILITANTS.
ISIS KIDNAPPED INTERNATIONAL AID
WORKER KAYLA MUELLER IN ALEPPO,
SYRIA, IN AUGUST OF 2013.
ISIS LEADERS CLAIM SHE DIED IN A
JORDANIAN AIR STRIKE, BUT U.S.
OFFICIALS HAVE NOT YET CONFIRMED
THAT.
MUELLER IS THE FOURTH AMERICAN
KILLED AFTER BEING TAKEN HOSTAGE
BY ISIS FIGHTERS.
AS MANY AS FIVE SEPARATE BOMB
BLASTS REPORTEDLY KILLED AT
LEAST 54 PEOPLE AND WOUNDED 143
OTHERS IN NORTHEASTERN NIGERIA.
SOME OF THE VICTIMS WERE
CHILDREN.
SUICIDE BOMBERS TARGETED A
COUPLE OF CROWDED MARKETS AND A
BUSY BUS STATION.
A CAR BOMB WENT OFF AT A
MILITARY CHECKPOINT.
FOR THE LATEST, WE'RE JOINED VIA
SKYPE BY NIGERIAN BUREAU CHIEF
WITH THE ASSOCIATED PRESS,
MICHELLE FAUL.
SO, WHAT YOU CAN TELL US ABOUT
WHAT HAPPENED TODAY?
>> WE'RE TOLD BY THE POLICE THAT
AT LEAST 54 PEOPLE WERE KILLED
AND ANOTHER 143 ARE IN HOSPITALS
IN MAIDUGURI.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THIS IS IN
THE CONTEXT OF ADVANCES THAT THE
NIGERIAN MILITARY SEEMS TO BE
MAKING IN OTHER PARTS OF THE
STATE AGAINST BOKO HARAM, RIGHT?
>> THE NIGERIAN MILITARY AND
CHADDIAN TROOPS WHO... THE
CHADDIANS HAVE ACTUALLY BEEN
LEADING THIS MULTINATIONAL
EFFORT TO WREST TOWNS AND
VILLAGES BACK FROM BOKO HARAM.
AND BOKO HARAM'S WAY OF DEALING
WITH THIS HAS BEEN WITH MANY
MORE SUICIDE BOMBINGS AND
ATTACKS ON REMOTE VILLAGES.
NOW, MAIDUGURI IS THE BIRTHPLACE
OF BOKO HARAM.
IT'S THE CITY WHERE BOKO HARAM
WOULD LIKE TO FORM AN ISLAMIC
CALIPHATE, WITH MAIDUGURI AS THE
CAPITAL.
SO, IT HAS GREAT SIGNIFICANCE
FOR THE ISLAMIC UPRISING.
>> Sreenivasan: AND OVER THE
PAST COUPLE OF WEEKS OR MONTHS,
WE'VE ALSO UNFORTUNATELY HAD
TO REPORT THAT SOME OF THESE
SUICIDE BOMBERS ARE YOUNG GIRLS
OR EVEN WOMEN.
>> GIRLS AS YOUNG AS TEN YEARS
OLD, WE'VE BEEN TOLD.
ONE OF THEM, A TEN-YEAR-OLD, SO
SHE APPEARED TO WITNESSES, WAS
RESPONSIBLE FOR BOMBING A MARKET
IN MAIDUGURI JUST LAST MONTH.
THERE ARE FEARS THAT THE WOMEN
THAT ARE BEING USED AND THE
GIRLS THAT ARE BEING USED IN
THESE ATTACKS MAY BE KIDNAP
VICTIMS.
AS YOU KNOW, BOKO HARAM HAS
KIDNAPPED HUNDREDS OF YOUNG
WOMEN, GIRLS, BOYS, YOUNG MEN.
NOBODY KNOWS HOW MANY.
I THINK THE MOST FAMOUS ONE
YOU'LL REMEMBER WERE NEARLY 300
GIRLS FROM A SCHOOL IN CHIBOK.
>> Sreenivasan: AND WHERE IS
NIGERIAN PUBLIC OPINION ON THIS
NOW?
>> NIGERIAN PUBLIC OPINION IS
VERY MIXED.
I THINK MOST PEOPLE ARE VERY
UPSET WITH PRESIDENT GOODLUCK
JONATHAN'S FAILURE TO CURTAIL
THIS UPRISING.
AND WE HAVE PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTIONS COMING UP ON MARCH 28,
A VERY IMPORTANT ELECTION FOR
PRESIDENT JONATHAN, WHO WANTS TO
BE RE-ELECTED.
BUT WE'RE TOLD BY ANALYSTS THAT
THIS IS SO CLOSE THAT IT IS TOO
CLOSE TO CALL.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
MICHELLE FAUL, NIGERIAN BUREAU
CHIEF OF THE ASSOCIATED PRESS
JOINING US VIA SKYPE, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> YOU'RE MOST WELCOME.
>> Sreenivasan: RUSSIAN
INVESTIGATORS HAVE DETAINED TWO
SUSPECTS IN THE MURDER OF ONE OF
VLADIMIR PUTIN'S MOST VOCAL
CRITICS, BORIS NEMTSOV.
SECURITY OFFICERS ARE NOT
COMMENTING ON HOW THE TWO MEN
MAY BE LINKED TO LAST MONTH'S
ASSASSINATION OUTSIDE THE
KREMLIN.
ACCORDING TO ONE UNIDENTIFIED
SOURCE, INVESTIGATORS TRACED THE
SUSPECTS THROUGH CELL PHONE
ACTIVITY AND D.N.A. EVIDENCE IN
THE GETAWAY CAR.
NEMTSOV'S POLITICAL ALLIES ARE
REPORTEDLY SKEPTICAL OF THE
INVESTIGATION AND SUSPECT
RUSSIAN LEADERS WERE INVOLVED IN
THE SHOOTING.
THE KREMLIN DENIES INVOLVEMENT
IN THE MURDER.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS TIME OF
YEAR, MANY PUBLIC TELEVISION
STATIONS ACROSS THE COUNTRY TAKE
TIME OUT TO ASK FOR YOUR
SUPPORT.
WITH THAT IN MIND, WE ARE TAKING
THIS OPPORTUNITY TO BRING YOU
UPDATES TO SOME SIGNATURE
SEGMENTS THAT HAVE AIRED IN
RECENT MONTHS.
TONIGHT, WE RETURN TO THE ISSUE
OF ASSISTED SUICIDE.
THE DEBATE OVER ASSISTED SUICIDE
HAS BEEN ACTIVE IN THIS COUNTRY
FOR DECADES BUT RESURFACED LAST
FALL AFTER A YOUNG CALIFORNIA
WOMAN WITH BRAIN CANCER BECAME
THE SUBJECT OF A NATIONAL
ADVOCACY CAMPAIGN.
SHE MOVED TO OREGON TO END HER
OWN LIFE.
IN THIS REPORT, ORIGINALLY
BROADCAST IN NOVEMBER, STEPHEN
FEE TRAVELS TO THE STATE THAT
WAS THE FIRST TO ENACT AN
ASSISTED SUICIDE LAW NEARLY 20
YEARS AGO.
>> Reporter: LIKE MILLIONS OF
AMERICANS, OREGONIAN PAM WALD
WAS RIVETED BY THE VIDEO OF
BRITTANY MAYNARD, A 29-YEAR-OLD
WOMAN SUFFERING FROM BRAIN
CANCER WHO MOVED HERE LAST YEAR
TO END HER OWN LIFE.
>> I LOOKED AT THAT VIDEO.
I STUDIED, ESPECIALLY THE LAST
TIME I SAW THAT VIDEO.
I DON'T THINK I LEFT HER EYES.
>> Reporter: MAYNARD LIVED IN
CALIFORNIA BUT RELOCATED TO TAKE
ADVANTAGE OF OREGON'S DEATH WITH
DIGNITY LAW THAT PERMITS WHAT
ADVOCATES CALL PHYSICIAN-
ASSISTED DYING BUT IS MORE
COMMONLY KNOWN AS PHYSICIAN-
ASSISTED SUICIDE.
>> I WILL DIE UPSTAIRS IN MY
BEDROOM THAT I SHARE WITH MY
HUSBAND, WITH MY MOTHER AND MY
HUSBAND BY MY SIDE.
>> Reporter: MAYNARD, WHO ENDED
HER OWN LIFE IN NOVEMBER, WAS
FEATURED IN A MEDIA CAMPAIGN BY
A GROUP CALLED COMPASSION AND
CHOICES.
20 YEARS EARLIER, ITS
PREDECESSOR GROUP PLAYED A KEY
ROLE IN ADVOCATING FOR OREGON'S
FIRST-IN-THE-NATION RIGHT-TO-DIE
BILL.
IN 1994, PAM WALD CONSIDERED
HERSELF A SUPPORTER OF OREGON'S
DEATH WITH DIGNITY ACT.
SO, YOU VOTED FOR IT, BUT YOU
NEVER THOUGHT, "THIS HAS TO DO
WITH ME."
>> NO, NO.
IT WAS KIND OF LIKE OUT OF
COMPASSION.
THE IDEA THAT, YOU KNOW, SOMEONE
GETS IN THIS SITUATION, THEY
DESERVE A RIGHT, YOU KNOW, TO
CHOOSE.
YOU KNOW, IT'S IMPORTANT TO
CHOOSE HOW WE LIVE OUR LIVES AND
HOW WE DIE.
>> Reporter: BUT THEN YOU FOUND
YOURSELF IN THIS SITUATION.
>> YES.
>> Reporter: WHERE YOU... WHERE
IT'S... NOW, THE STORY'S ABOUT
YOU.
>> YEAH.
THIS IS MY HUSBAND.
>> Reporter: IN 2011, PAM'S
HUSBAND OF 43 YEARS, BEN WALD,
DISCOVERED AN EARLIER BOUT OF
CANCER HAD RETURNED; SOON AFTER,
THE DISEASE BEGAN TAKING A
LETHAL TOLL.
PAM AND DAUGHTER BONNIE WATCHED
AS THE ONCE ROBUST BEN RAPIDLY
LOST WEIGHT.
AS THE CANCER SPREAD TO HIS
BONES, THE PAIN BECAME
INTOLERABLE.
>> BEN WOKE ME UP IN THE MIDDLE
OF THE NIGHT, AND HE SAID, "PAM,
WE'VE GOT TO TALK.
I DON'T WANT TO KEEP, YOU
KNOW... I'M DYING, PAM.
I'VE HAD A GOOD LIFE WITH YOU
AND BONNIE.
I REALLY DON'T WANT TO JUST KEEP
LIVING LIKE THIS.
I WANT TO EXPLORE OREGON'S DEATH
WITH DIGNITY LAW."
>> Reporter: UNDER OREGON'S LAW,
A DOCTOR MUST DETERMINE A
TERMINALLY ILL PATIENT HAS SIX
MONTHS OR FEWER TO LIVE.
THE PHYSICIAN CAN WRITE A LIFE-
ENDING PRESCRIPTION ONLY AFTER A
SECOND DOCTOR SIGNS ON AND BOTH
AGREE THE PATIENT IS OF SOUND
MIND.
THE PATIENT MUST REQUEST THE
DRUG AGAIN 15 DAYS AFTER THE
INITIAL REQUEST.
BUT ONCE THE PATIENT HAS IT, THE
DOCTORS' ROLE IS OVER.
SINCE THE LAW WENT INTO EFFECT
IN 1997, OVER 1,300 PEOPLE HAVE
RECEIVED LIFE-ENDING
PRESCRIPTIONS, BUT JUST 859 HAVE
ACTUALLY TAKEN THEM AND DIED.
OTHERS DIED SOONER AND SOME
CHANGED THEIR MINDS.
AS BEN'S HEALTH DETERIORATED, HE
AND PAM SOUGHT HELP FROM
COMPASSION AND CHOICES, THE
GROUP THAT SUPPORTED BRITTANY
MAYNARD.
IN 2012, THE GROUP CONNECTED
THEM WITH TWO DOCTORS WHO SIGNED
OFF ON BEN'S WISHES.
>> MONDAY, BEN GOT THE ORDER FOR
THE PRESCRIPTION, SO IT MEANT WE
COULD PICK IT UP ON WEDNESDAY.
AND I THOUGHT, AT THAT POINT, WE
WOULD HAVE IT, AND THEN WE WOULD
JUST KIND OF SEE.
I THOUGHT I HAD MORE TIME WITH
HIM.
BUT HE SAID TO ME, "PAM, I WANT
TO TAKE IT ON FRIDAY OF THAT
WEEK."
>> Reporter: PORTLAND PHYSICIAN
BILL TOFFLER ALSO FOLLOWED THE
CASE OF BRITTANY MAYNARD;
BRITTANY'S STORY STRUCK A CHORD
WITH HIM, TOO.
TOFFLER'S WIFE OF 40 YEARS WAS
DIAGNOSED WITH CANCER IN 2009.
>> WE WERE BLESSED WITH FIVE
YEARS AFTER THE DIAGNOSIS WAS
MADE, AND SHE DIED JUST FOUR AND
A HALF MONTHS AGO.
>> Reporter: FOR DR. TOFFLER AND
HIS WIFE, ASSISTED SUICIDE WAS
NEVER AN OPTION.
HE LEADS A GROUP, PHYSICIANS FOR
COMPASSIONATE CARE EDUCATION
FOUNDATION, THAT OPPOSES
PRESCRIBING LETHAL DRUGS TO
TERMINAL PATIENTS.
>> EVERY DAY WE LIVED
DIFFERENTLY BECAUSE WE KNEW THAT
WE HAD A LIMITED AMOUNT OF TIME
IN A WAY THAT I NEVER PERCEIVED
BEFORE I HAD A WIFE WITH THAT
CLEAR DIAGNOSIS.
AND I'D HOPE THAT PATIENTS
RECOGNIZE THAT I VALUE THEM AS A
DOCTOR REGARDLESS OF HOW
DISABLED THEY ARE, REGARDLESS OF
HOW SICK THEY ARE, THAT THEIR
LIFE STILL HAS MEANING AND
VALUE.
AND I WANT TO REFLECT THAT EVEN
WHEN THEY DON'T SEE IT
THEMSELVES.
>> Reporter: BUT WHAT ABOUT THE
FEAR AND THE PAIN THAT CAN
SURROUND DYING?
WHY NOT HELP, I ASKED DR.
TOFFLER, IF A PATIENT ASKS?
>> IT IS A VERY SCARY TIME.
AND AT THAT TIME, I WANT TO COME
AROUND THE PERSON.
I WANT TO WALK ALONGSIDE THEM.
I WANT TO BE THE BEST DOCTOR I
CAN BE.
I'M CALLED TO BE MORE OF A
DOCTOR THAN EVER.
I'M NOT SUPPOSED TO BE THE
PERSON WHO HELPS HER TO KILL
HERSELF.
THAT'S ALL TOO EASY.
>> Reporter: IN A POLICY
OPINION, THE AMERICAN MEDICAL
ASSOCIATION SAYS "PHYSICIAN-
ASSISTED SUICIDE IS
FUNDAMENTALLY INCOMPATIBLE WITH
THE PHYSICIAN'S ROLE AS HEALER."
AND SOME RELIGIOUS GROUPS, MOST
NOTABLY THE U.S. CONFERENCE OF
CATHOLIC BISHOPS, HAVE STRONGLY
OPPOSED THE PRACTICE.
ACCORDING TO THE GALLUP POLLING
ORGANIZATION, A SLIM MAJORITY OF
AMERICANS SUPPORTS ASSISTED
SUICIDE.
IT'S ONLY LEGAL IN OREGON,
WASHINGTON AND VERMONT.
BUT SINCE BRITTANY MAYNARD'S
DEATH, DOZENS OF STATES HAVE
INTRODUCED OR ARE RECONSIDERING
DEATH WITH DIGNITY LEGISLATION.
AND ADVOCATES HAVE MADE PROGRESS
IN THE COURTS.
DECISIONS IN MONTANA AND NEW
MEXICO HAVE OPENED THE DOOR TO
ASSISTED DYING.
LAST MONTH, PLAINTIFFS FILED
SUIT TO ALLOW THE PRACTICE IN
CALIFORNIA AND NEW YORK, AND
CANADA'S SUPREME COURT STRUCK
DOWN THAT COUNTRY'S NATIONAL BAN
ON ASSISTED DYING.
BIOETHICIST ARTHUR CAPLAN, WHO
WAS AN OPPONENT OF THE PRACTICE
BUT NOW SUPPORTS IT, SAYS THE
TERMS OF THE DEBATE HAVEN'T
REALLY CHANGED OVER THE PAST 20
YEARS, EVEN WITH THE PUBLICITY
SURROUNDING BRITTANY MAYNARD'S
CASE.
WE SPOKE TO HIM BEFORE MAYNARD
DIED LATE LAST YEAR.
>> I THINK WHAT'S DIFFERENT IN
THIS DEBATE IS THAT BRITTANY
MAYNARD IS 29, ATTRACTIVE,
ARTICULATE, ALMOST PASSIONATE
ABOUT HER RIGHT TO CHOOSE HERE.
THAT'S MAKING THE DEBATE FOCUS
FOR A GROUP THAT DIDN'T PAY
ATTENTION, YOUNGER PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: CAPLAN SAYS FEARS
OF FIGURES LIKE DR. JACK
KEVORKIAN HELPED DERAIL THE
RIGHT-TO-DIE MOVEMENT IN THE
1990S AND THAT IMPROVEMENTS IN
END-OF-LIFE CARE HAVE EASED
AMERICANS' CONCERNS OVER
SUFFERING AT DEATH.
>> I CAN'T EVEN TELL YOU THE
AMOUNT OF RELIEF THAT IT
PROVIDES ME.
>> Reporter: BUT HE SAYS
BRITTANY MAYNARD'S CASE MAY
PROVIDE NEW MOMENTUM FOR
SUPPORTERS OF ASSISTED SUICIDE.
>> I THINK SHE'S SHIFTING THE
POLITICS IN A WAY THAT WE MAY
SEE SOME OF THE FOLKS WHO GOT
TIED UP IN, SAY, TRYING TO
BROADEN MARRIAGE LAWS AND TRYING
TO SEE HOMOSEXUALITY GAIN WIDER
ACCEPTANCE MOVE TO SAY "THIS IS
A CHOICE I WANT.
THIS IS SOMETHING I CARE ABOUT
BECAUSE IT'S HER."
>> Reporter: ON MAY 4, 2012, PAM
AND BEN WALD GATHERED THEIR
CLOSEST FRIENDS IN THE LIVING
ROOM.
THEY SANG SONGS TOGETHER, AND,
AFTERWARD, IN THE BEDROOM THEY
SHARED, PAM HANDED BEN THE
MEDICATION THAT WOULD END HIS
LIFE.
HE TOOK IT WITHOUT HESITATING.
>> EARLY ON, WHEN I GOT TOGETHER
WITH MY HUSBAND AND WE WERE
FIRST TOGETHER, WE'D BE LAYING
IN BED TOGETHER, AND HE WAS
THINKING, HE'D GO LIKE THIS WITH
HIS HANDS.
HIS HANDS WERE ALWAYS MOVING.
IT'S KIND OF LIKE, IT'S WHEN HE
WAS THINKING KIND OF THING AND
EVERYTHING.
BUT WHAT I'VE NEVER FORGOTTEN IS
HIS HANDS WERE LIKE THIS ON HIS
CHEST, AND I HELD MY HANDS ON
TOP OF HIS.
BUT HIS HANDS NEVER WENT LIKE
THAT, AND THEY JUST STAYED
BECAUSE HE WAS JUST AT PEACE.
AND HIS LAST WORDS WERE "THANK
YOU."
AND HE DIED IN TWO HOURS.
>> Reporter: BEN WALD WAS 75
YEARS OLD.
SO, WHAT CAN WE LEARN FROM
OREGON'S EXPERIENCE?
KATRINA HEDBERG OF THE STATE
HEALTH AUTHORITY, WHO'S NEUTRAL
ON THE ISSUE, TRACKS STATISTICS
ON OREGON'S DEATH WITH DIGNITY
LAW.
>> INITIALLY, THERE WERE A
NUMBER OF CONCERNS THAT PEOPLE
HAD AROUND, WOULD THIS BE
DISPROPORTIONATELY USED BY
PEOPLE WHO WERE DISENFRANCHISED?
SO, UNEDUCATED OR PEOPLE WHO
MIGHT HAVE HAD DISABILITIES OR
THOSE KINDS OF THINGS.
AND WE'VE REALLY FOUND THAT THE
PEOPLE WHO ARE PARTICIPATING ARE
PEOPLE WHO REALLY WANT TO
CONTROL THE TIMING AND MANNER
SURROUNDING THEIR DEATH.
>> Reporter: STILL, DR. TOFFLER
SAYS THOSE FINAL MONTHS AND DAYS
SHOULD NEVER BE CUT SHORT, AS HE
LEARNED FROM EXPERIENCE WITH HIS
OWN WIFE.
>> WE WERE MARRIED FOR 40 YEARS,
AND, IN THE LAST FIVE YEARS, I
THINK WE HAD THE BEST YEARS OF
OUR LIFE WHEN SHE ACTUALLY HAD A
TERMINAL DIAGNOSIS.
AND I... I WOULDN'T TRADE THOSE
FIVE YEARS FOR ANYTHING.
>> Reporter: AS FOR PAM, SHE'S
NOW VOLUNTEERING FOR COMPASSION
AND CHOICES, GUIDING OTHER
FAMILIES THROUGH A PROCESS SHE
NOW KNOWS FIRSTHAND.
>> NOBODY WANTS TO TALK ABOUT
DYING AND DEATH, BUT ONCE WE GET
INTO THAT, IT REALLY BECOMES AN
ACT OF LOVE.
IT REALLY DOES.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT'S THE STATE
OF ASSISTED SUICIDE LAWS ACROSS
THE UNITED STATES?
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
FINALLY TONIGHT, A PAIR OF
HOODED GUNMEN KILLED FIVE
PEOPLE, INCLUDING A FRENCH
CITIZEN AND A BELGIUM SECURITY
WORKER IN AN ATTACK IN MALI.
TWO SWISS SOLDIERS WERE
CRITICALLY INJURED AND A PAIR OF
U.N. EXPERTS WERE ALSO WOUNDED.
NIGERIA'S MILITANT ISLAMIC
GROUP, BOKO HARAM, POSTED A
RECORDING ONLINE PLEDGING
ALLEGIANCE TO ISIS IN IRAQ AND
SYRIA.
BOKO HARAM HAS DEPLOYED SUICIDE
BOMBERS AND ORGANIZED MASS
KIDNAPPINGS OVER THE PAST SIX
YEARS IN AN ATTEMPT TO CARVE OUT
AN ISLAMIC STATE IN NORTHERN
NIGERIA.
AND RETURNING TO OUR LEAD STORY,
ON THE WAY TO SELMA, ALABAMA
TODAY, PRESIDENT OBAMA SIGNED
LEGISLATION AWARDING
CONGRESSIONAL GOLD MEDALS TO THE
THOUSANDS OF FOOT SOLDIERS WHO
MARCHED FOR VOTING RIGHTS 50
YEARS AGO THIS MONTH.
THE GOLD MEDAL IS ONE OF THE
HIGHEST CIVILIAN HONORS AWARDED
BY CONGRESS.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.